---
title: Isomorphic router in functional paradigm
date: 22 June 2015
collection: posts
path: /posts/2015-07-22-router-1.html
template: post.html
---

For the last time functional paradigm becomes more popular in the frontend
community (and not only). I believe it's wonderful because functions are much
easier to write and test, which gives us more maintainable codebase,
and we know that maintenance is pain. I won't to go deep in description of
functional paradigm but I'll use its principles. If you want to read about
functional programming then you could read [Functional Programming For The Rest
of Us] article and watch [Functional Programming] slides.

[Functional Programming For The Rest of Us]: http://www.defmacro.org/ramblings/fp.html
[Functional Programming]: http://scott.sauyet.com/Javascript/Talk/FunctionalProgramming/

In additional to functional paradigm, frontend community evolving idea about
isomorphic code and isomorphic applications. In short, isomorphic code runs on
both sides client and server. Pros are obvious — you could share some code
between platforms and don't repeat yourself.

To describe the meaning of isomorphic applications I should tell you about main
problem of modern client side web applications. Now, when everyone owns some
mobile device and cellular network isn't good enough, developers should think
about performance and interactivity. Classic web sites could be strongly
optimised on loading time, but they don't interactive sufficiently. Web
applications is opposite, much more interactive but they're have long
initialisation process.

This problems are solved in isomorphic applications. Using isomorphic code,
server could initialise a copy of client application for every request.
It means that server could send pre-rendered application screen to client and
client could show it to user while other resources are still loading. After all
resources is loaded by client, it could initialise own copy of application and
replace screen insensibly for user.

In current article series I'll try to describe and implement simple isomorphic
router using functional paradigm principles. My experience as functional API
architect isn't great, so I consider this as an experiment.

I choose router because it's important and integral part of any modern client
side web application. Most of popular frameworks provides own router out of the
box, but this routers usually aren't simple. I'll try to implement simple and
extendible router at the same time.

I'll use awesome static type checker [Flow] and all new ECMAScript features
available in [Babel].

[Flow]: http://flowtype.org/
[Babel]: https://babeljs.io/

---

## Part 1 — Definitions

Before implementation I should define what router does and what are router parts.
It's really simple - router transforms some URL into action which changes a
current screen of application. This action is usually called *transition*.
Transition could be asynchronous if new screen depends on some data on a server.
At the same time transition couldn't return new screen if URL isn't valid for it.

```js
type Transition = (url: Url) => Promise<?Screen>
```

URL is just a string, but what is a screen? I don't want to depend on any
framework or template engine so in my case screen could be any object.

```js
type Url = string
type Screen = Object
```

Router itself is a system that could push notifications about screen changes and
could be notified about URL changes. It's very similar on *Observable* behaviour
that implemented in [RxJS] library but I don't want complicate my router so I
just define simple subscribe API.

[RxJS]: https://github.com/Reactive-Extensions/RxJS

```js
type Listener<T> = (value: ?T) => void
type Subscriber<T> = (listener: Listener<T>) => Unsubscriber
type Unsubscriber = () => void

type Router = {
  subscribe: Subscriber<Screen>,
  navigateTo: (url: Url) => Promise<?Screen>
}
```

Listener is a function that receives changes, Subscriber is function that
receives a listener and returns Unsubscriber function. So Router have function
that subscribes on the current screen and function that notifies router about
current URL.

Isomorphism imposes a limitation on singletones usage. Also router should
have knowledge about all application transitions. Router constructor solves
that problems.

```js
type RouterCreator = (transition: Transition) => Router
```

You could see that constructor receives only one transition function.
But every single application that needs router has at least two transitions!
Because transition is a simple function then we can apply on it every functional
pattern including higher-order functions. Using higher-order function I could
compose all application transitions into single function. I'll describe this
pattern in the next part.

That's all about basic router parts. Other definitions I'll provide later when
necessary.

---

## Part 2. Higher-order transitions

This part will contain more code than words. I'll start from two transition
functions for two screens.

```js
type QueryParameters = {[key: string]: string}

async function indexTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
  if (url !== '/') {
    return null
  }

  const props = await api.fetchIndexData()

  return {component: 'IndexPage', props}
}

async function itemTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
  const queryParameters: ?QueryParameters = matchRoutePattern('/items/:id', url)

  if (!queryParameters) {
    return null
  }

  const {id} = queryParameters

  const props = await api.fetchItemData({id})

  return {component: 'ItemPage', props}
}
```

Pretty easy but I don't want implement URL matching in every transition.
I'm already extracted everything that I can into separate functions, but I can
dig deeper. Functions in JavaScript is first-class citizens. It means that I can
pass any function as argument and return one function from another. Using this
properties of JavaScript I can write another function that will create
transitions for me.

```js
type TransitionHandler = (queryParameters: QueryParameters) => Promise<Screen>

type TransitionCreator = (pattern: string, handler: TransitionHandler) => Transition

function createTransition(pattern: string, handler: TransitionHandler): Transition {
  return async function transition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
    const queryParameters: ?QueryParameters = matchRoutePattern(pattern, url)

    if (!queryParameters) {
      return null
    }

    return await handler(queryParameters)
  }
}
```

Now transitions became simpler.

```js
const indexTransition: Transition = createTransition('/',
  async function(queryParameters: QueryParameters): Promise<Screen> {
    return {
      component: 'IndexPage',
      props: await api.fetchIndexData()
    }
  }
)

const itemTransition: Transition = createTransition('/items/:id',
  async function({id: string}: QueryParameters): Promise<Screen> {
    return {
      component: 'ItemPage',
      props: await api.fetchItemData({id})
    }
  }
)
```

However how to pass this two functions into one argument? To do this I'll create
one more function that will combine several transitions into single transition
that will invoke them in series.

```js
type TransitionsCombinator = (...transitions: Array<Transition>) => Transition

function combineTransitions(...transitions: Array<Transition>): Transition {
  return async function combinedTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
    for (const transition of transitions) {
      const page: ?Screen = await transition(url)

      if (page) {
        return page
      }
    }

    return null
  }
}

const allTransitions = combineTransitions(
  indexTransition,
  itemTransition
)
```

That's how most routers works. Implementing URL matching and data fetching in
one function gives much more freedom to configuration and don't complicates API.

I'll add one more transition for the screen of 404 page.

```js
async function notFoundTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
  return {component: 'NotFoundPage', props: {}}
}

const allTransitions = combineTransitions(
  indexTransition,
  itemTransition,
  notFoundTransition
)
```

In the same way I can wrap all transitions to catch an error that I can use in
the screen of error page.

```js
function createErrorTransition(transition: Transition): Transition {
  return function errorTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
    try {
      return await transition(url)
    } catch (error) {
      return {
        component: 'ErrorPage',
        props: {error}
      }
    }
  }
}

const allTransitions = createErrorTransition(
  combineTransitions(
    indexTransition,
    itemTransition,
    notFoundTransition
  )  
)
```

I'll play little more. Most routers has ability to wrap group of transitions
with some prefix.

```js
type PrefixTransition = (prefix: Url, transition: Transition) => Transition

function prefixTransition(prefix: Url, transition: Transition): Transition {
  const prefixRe: RegExp = new RegExp(`^${prefix}`)

  return async function prefixedTransition(url: Url): Promise<?Screen> {
    return await transition(url.replace(prefixRe, ''))
  }
}

const allTransitions = createErrorTransition(
  combineTransitions(
    prefixTransition(
      '/pages',
      combineTransitions(
        indexTransition,
        itemTransition
      )
    ),
    notFoundTransition
  )  
)
```

To make it possible I'm used higher-order functions. I'm just wrapped function
to change its behaviour but I leave a same interface. That allows me to create
both simple and powerful library API.

In next parts I'll implement support of History API, tell you how to use router
on the server side, add redirect support, show you how easy to test this all,
and so on.
